It is August 7, year 2000, testing, testing, testing one.
Testing the other mic, testing the other mic, testing the other mic.
Okay.
This is August 7, 2000, seated in the Heritage Preservation Program offices, and I have the honor and pleasure to chat with Dr. Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., the chairman, or is the title head?
Was head.
Oh, you're not head anymore?
No.
Of the Department of Anthropology.
To begin with, because a stranger might listen to this or read the tape, read the transcription,
Describe your family background, mom and dad, and where you grew up and where you went to school before you started having the opportunity to be an Aggie.
Sure.
I was born in Dallas, Texas.
My father at the time was working as a reporter for the Dallas Morning News.
And about six months after I was born, he was offered an opportunity to
teach Spanish in an English university in Panama City, Panama, in the Canal Zone.
Well, I guess it was in the Canal Zone.
So we moved to the Canal Zone six months after I was born.
I was born in October of 1940, so that would have been early 1941.
And we lived in the Canal Zone for a couple years, and I remember hearing my father
My mother would tell me the stories of when Pearl Harbor was bombed.
Everybody in the Canal Zone panicked because the biggest thing they had was a couple of machine guns, and they suspected that the Japanese fleet would sail on from Hawaii over to the Canal Zone and try to seal the canal so that it could no longer be used.
They were already starting blackouts and things like that, but fortunately nothing ever happened.
Shortly after that, in 1942, my father quit working for the university there in the Canal Zone and became a war correspondent for the Associated Press.
And they sent him to South America.
And in the next five to six years, we lived in every capital in South America.
Never more than a few months, it seemed like.
We lived in Rio, and we lived in La Paz, and we lived in Santiago, Chile, and Buenos Aires, and all of the big capitals down there.
I don't have a whole lot of memories of that.
There are a couple of them that stand out, and that is that when we were living in Paraguay, or was it Uruguay?
I'm not sure which one.
Anyway, one day we took an excursion boat out into the ocean, and we got a chance to see the Grouse Bay, which had been sunk, scuttled,
As you remember, it went into Montevideo and was cornered and decided to go out and scuttle itself a few miles offshore.
And I remember this tour boat going out, you know, passengers, and we went around this blackened superstructure.
That's all that was above water, but there was still quite a bit above water.
And I remember that vividly, and I didn't understand what it was, but it seemed to be an important thing.
My other recollection was going over the Andes in a train on my birthday, October 5th, in 1946.
And I remember seeing as we were going over the Andes, up in the very top of the Andes, from Buenos Aires to Santiago, that's the way they used to drive the cattle herds from Argentina over to Chile, and they would drive them over in the summertime.
Anyway, a lot of the cattle didn't make it and so they would die on the side of the railway track and of course that was the main cut through the mountain so they would run them through the railway.
So I remember seeing numerous carcasses of frozen cattle
as we were crossing the Andes.
Anyway, so then, well, the one other thing I remember was living in Rio.
We lived in Rio de Janeiro for a while, and my brother was born there.
1945.
And we lived at 777 Copacabana, which was a high-rise building right on Copacabana Beach, which today would probably cost you an arm and a leg.
Back then it was rather inexpensive property.
Living in Rio at that time was interesting.
I remember going to Sugarloaf Mountain and up to see the big statue of Christ and some of the other things like that.
So it was a fun time.
And came back to the United States in 1947, late 47.
My father had taken a job with the Port of New Orleans as Director of International Relations, and we lived in New Orleans for a few years.
I don't remember.
In fact, I remember when I lived in New Orleans, the streetcar still went down Canal Street as well as St.
Charles.
You could take the streetcar all the way to the end of Canal.
Anyway, we lived right near Audubon Park for a while, and then eventually built a house out in Metri, which at that time was a boondocks, but now it's almost downtown New Orleans.
That's M-E-T-A-I-R-I-E.
Yeah, Metri.
Metri, yeah.
But anyway, that was very enjoyable.
It was a fun time.
From there, he accepted a job as the head of the Good Neighbor Commission,
working for Governor Alan Shivers in Austin.
And so we moved to Austin, where he then began doing a lot of traveling in Mexico.
And in fact, we got to travel with him some of the time.
One of the better experiences, or the more fun experiences, was we went down to Yucatan and spent several weeks down there and went out to Chichen Itza,
You'll have a good time spelling that one.
But anyway, Chichen Itza, which is a large archaeological site that the Mexicans had just restored, and they were opening a big hotel called Maya Land.
And we were there for the inauguration and opening of this big fancy hotel.
The governor of Mexico was there and a governor of the state of Yucatan.
Anyway, it was a big thing and it was a lot of fun.
Shortly after that, my parents got divorced and my mother...
married an Alaskan and moved to Sterling, Alaska, which is south of Anchorage on the Kenai Peninsula, K-E-N-A-I.
This was back when it was still a state in 1957.
I'm sorry, still a territory in 1957.
And so I moved up along with my brother, my brother and me, moved up to, my brother and I, yeah, right, sorry.
My brother and I moved up to Alaska with my mother.
And we lived on a homestead, which was about four and a half miles from the next neighbor on a gravel road.
in a little town called Sterling, Alaska, which had a population of about 35.
And Kenai, which was the next biggest town, it was a fish cannery, had a population of several hundred.
Today, Kenai has 20,000 people.
But anyway, I remember when we flew to Alaska, the last leg of the flight was in a DC-3.
and we landed on a dirt runway in the mud.
It had steel grading on it, much like they did overseas during the war, but that was it.
It was a dirt runway with steel grading, and they didn't even have a conning tower.
It was just a little shack, and I guess they just flew in by visual sighting or something.
We lived in Alaska for a couple years, and then I came back to Texas to go to high school.
My father had remarried, moved to Houston, where he had gotten a job again with the Port of Houston as Director of International Relations.
So we moved to Houston and went to high school there.
Which high school?
I went to San Jacinto High School, which is now a tech college.
In fact,
I was on the football team and it was interesting.
I played two years of football and my younger brother played two years of football.
And between us we played four consecutive years during which we never won a game.
At one time we held the 5A high school record for consecutive losses in the state of Texas.
Anyway, part of the problem was that San Jacinto High School was very close to, well, it was close to, it wasn't close to Meyerland, but it was close to Old Spanish Trail.
And there were a lot of Jewish people that lived in that area.
And in fact, the high school was sometimes called Sheeney High.
And the reason being is that the vast majority of students there were Jewish.
Nothing against the Jews, but they didn't particularly care to play football.
Most of them excelled in basketball, track, and other sports.
But for some reason, there weren't, as far as I can remember, a single Jew on the football team.
And so the football team consisted mainly of Gentiles.
Of course, there were no other minorities, no blacks or anything like that in school at that time.
So at times when we would go play football, we would never have more than 19 people even suit up, which is not even a complete double squad.
In other words, most of us played offense and defense.
And I remember our coach was named Coach Phillips, and one of his famous expressions at halftime was,
When he'd get us all together, his pep talk would always end with, okay, boys, go back out there and let's see if we can hold the score down.
Because some of the scores against us were astronomical, 40s and 50s and 60s to nothing or to three or six points.
But anyway.
All right, so after high school, I also swam in high school, and we did a little better in swimming, and there were Jews on the swimming team.
But anyway, then went to the University of Texas, where I began majoring in geology first.
No, actually, it was journalism.
I decided I was going to be a journalist, and I enjoyed journalism, except I found out that I had to write stories about things I wasn't particularly interested in, and I didn't want to do that, so I got out of journalism.
and then got into geography and got my bachelor's degree in geography.
While I was doing geography, I learned to make maps and became a cartographer.
And this is when I started working for the University of Texas Press as their primary cartographer, drawing maps and illustrations for their books.
This was under Frank Wardlaw.
And then as I entered my graduate work, I went into anthropology.
Why?
The anthropology department offered me a fellowship or a teaching assistantship if I would draw maps of archaeological sites for them.
which they couldn't seem to do very well, which was rather easy for me.
So that's how I got into anthropology, and I ended up getting a master's degree in anthropology, continuing to work for Frank Woodlaw at the press.
In fact, I was chief illustrator and mapmaker for, oh, I don't know, it seemed like about six years or so.
Let's sidetrack a second.
Describe Frank Wardlaw as you recall him at that time, since he would end up here as our press director.
Well, I didn't have a whole lot of contact directly with Frank Wardlaw, although I remember him as being, he seemed big to me, big and impressive, and a very, you know, very nice, congenial sort of person.
I mean, my brief meetings with him
were very congenial and very nice, and I got to be, you know, fairly good friends, although most of my work was with some of the editors.
It was Dr. Wardlaw, Mr. Wardlaw, whatever.
Frank Wardlaw very rarely ever interceded in these things.
Just once in a while I would see him at social functions that were held at the university press or something like that.
And remember, I was just a graduate student.
I was not, you know, big shot, so.
Then PhD where?
Well, after this, you'll love this story, too.
After I got my master's degree in anthropology, and while I was in anthropology, my last year in anthropology, or actually, I guess it was shortly after I entered anthropology, an archaeologist at the University of Texas by the name of Ed Jelks got one of the first
what we would call a paleo-environmental NSF grant.
He and several colleagues got a grant to do the paleo-ecology of the Amnistad Reservoir, which was just being built at this time south of Del Rio, or actually a little north of Del Rio, and backs up along the Rio Grande and Pecos Rivers.
And so they had been doing cultural resource salvage work out there.
In fact, they'd worked there in the WPA days as well.
But this was an NSF grant to go out and try to do an in-depth study into a number of different aspects.
They wanted to look at the ecology.
They wanted to look at the plant remains.
They wanted to look at the animal remains, perhaps even diet reconstructions and whatever.
So they had this money in the department and they didn't have anybody, they didn't have any gophers.
They needed some graduate student gophers.
My understanding is that they offered the job to several graduate students who turned them down.
And eventually they asked me, they called me in one day, and they said, well, we need a student to be a gopher, and we need somebody primarily to assist with the palynology.
And we wanted to know whether or not you would be interested in doing this.
And I said, well, you know, what does it pay?
And they said $300 a month.
And they said this would be a two-year job.
And I said, well, of course, I would be more than happy to do that.
Now this is what year?
This would be about 1966.
No, 1965.
Yeah, 1965.
I said, I'd be more than happy to do this.
So I then went out and got a dictionary and tried to find out what palynology meant.
I had no idea what it meant.
I'd never heard of the word.
It turned out it was pollen studies.
So that's what happened.
For the next couple of years, I assisted.
palynologists who were hired by this grant from other universities like John McAndrews who was from up in Canada and they hired Dick Heavily from Arizona, H-E-V-L-Y.
But anyway, and so my job was to assist them and of course there were some very interesting, I learned a lot.
I had a background in anthropology and the reason that they selected me I found out and asked me if I wanted is because they were looking through my transcript and noticed that I'd taken two courses in plant geography and so they figured I must know something about plants.
One of the things I learned as this gopher was that anthropologists and botanists very rarely knew how to communicate with each other because I remember I was in my role as gopher, was escorting a palynologist, a botanist from Arizona State University out to the Omnistab Reservoir around Langtree
And the archaeologist who was working on this big site out there by the name of Dick Ross, anyway, the two, three of us actually, were walking across the barren landscape out in that area right along the Rio Grande.
And I remember Dick Hevely, the botanist, looked down at a small bush that was not much higher than your knee, and he said, my God, I've never seen a Quercus virginiana that small.
And the archaeologist looked at it and said, hell, I thought that was an oak.
And that, to me, expressed the problem that existed at that time, as the botanist and the anthropologist never talked to each other.
And in fact, my later job was to clean up a lot of the writing that became part of the final report of this big NSF grant because the botanists wrote with no understanding of archaeology and the archaeologists wrote with no understanding of botany and I tried to, I was, you know, part of my job was to edit this stuff and to try to make it all compatible.
In the process, I began to see that, to me, what seemed like an interesting thing to pursue would be to try to do botanical work within the field of archaeology.
But with a background in archaeology, I felt that I would be more of an asset than somebody who was just strictly a botanist.
So I, after getting my master's in anthropology, left and joined the botany department for a PhD, still at the University of Texas.
and ended up getting my PhD in botany.
Why botany?
Because I figured that if I was going to be
looking at plant materials.
I would need the kind of in-depth training you would get by doing a doctoral study in botany.
And I didn't think I could get that kind of information in anthropology.
So I ended up with three degrees, one in geography, one in anthropology, and one in botany.
This was 1969 when I finished.
I had six job offers, and it wasn't that I was the most outstanding graduate.
It's just in 1969, jobs were plentiful.
And of the six job offers, I finally decided on one at Washington State University, mainly because I had seen all these Sierra Club posters of how beautiful the state of Washington was, the beautiful coniferous forest.
And of course, coming from Texas, it was rather flat and dry.
So we went up to Washington State University in Pullman, but I discovered that Pullman is not in the middle of the Cascade Mountains.
Pullman is in a barren area that looks much like El Paso.
Anyway, Pullman is noted for its wheat, and it's a big wheat belt area.
The university at Pullman, they had a fairly good-sized anthropology department,
and they were beginning to try to build something that they called the Quaternary Option.
which was an attempt to train archaeologists in a little bit of faunal analysis, a little bit of plant analysis, a little bit of ecology, a little bit of bone analysis, a little bit of soil analysis, so that when they go out and looked at sites, they would know more than just looking at the sherds and flint chips and stuff like this.
and I was hired to do the botanical part.
They had hired somebody else to do the faunal part and somebody else to do the geology and so forth.
But when I got there, I found out, and this was something, you know, I had my PhD in hand, but when I got there, or actually when they had hired me, which was earlier while I was still finishing up my PhD,
They made it very clear in the letter that it really didn't make any difference whether I finished immediately or not, that I could have a few more years if I needed it, and not that I wanted to hesitate and do it.
Although there was an interesting point.
I got a call from Ralph Selecki, who was then chairman of the anthropology department at the University of Columbia, who in fact had also offered me a job at Columbia University.
asked me if I would go to Lebanon with him and spend the summer doing the ethnobotanical remains from a large Neolithic site, which would have been a wonderful opportunity.
But I was writing my dissertation, and I turned him down.
I hated to do that.
But in retrospect, it was a wise decision.
So anyway.
But when I got to Washington State University, seven of the 12 faculty members didn't have PhDs.
They were all working on them, but they didn't have them.
And Washington State had some other problems.
The main problem was, shortly after I arrived,
The supersonic transport was something that the United States government had been interested in funding.
It was sort of like, well, the Concorde was the one thing that remains of it.
But the United States at one time was going to build a whole fleet of these things.
And so it was funded through Boeing and, of course, Seattle.
And when the federal government yanked the B-1, or not the B-1, but when they yanked the supersonic transport funding, the whole state of Washington went into almost deprivation.
The university got its budget cuts.
There weren't any raises.
There was no money for travel.
In fact, you even had to get permission from the department chairman to even make a long-distance phone call.
And so times were grim.
Anyway, the main problem I had in living in Washington was not necessarily the budget cuts or anything, but coming from Texas with 200 or 350 days of sunshine,
and going to Pullman, Washington, where in September it's clouds over and you don't see the sun again until May.
In fact, I remember counting 21 consecutive days in which you could not see the sun.
And it drizzled every day almost, or it rained, or occasionally it snowed.
And in the wintertime it would snow in the morning early before sunrise.
By noon it would melt into slush.
By afternoon it would freeze again.
So all the roads were always icy.
So I decided that it was time to bail out of Washington State.
And this is where the interesting part comes in.
In 1968, of course, Texas A&M had decided to build a College of Liberal Arts, and they approved this.
They had hired David Maxwell to come over from Tulane to be the first dean of liberal arts, and in his or the university's projection, they had created the Department of Sociology and Anthropology, but they had nobody in anthropology.
All they had was sociology.
And the first head was Robert Skorbonik,
who had come out of rural sociology.
Anyway, that's sort of a little background.
So in 1970, I began writing letters to some friends of mine, not a whole lot of friends,
Not a whole lot of people.
And the main thing, since I was a botanist, I wasn't really looking for a job in anthropology.
I was looking for a job in botany.
And so I was writing botany departments.
And one of the people I wrote was a good friend of mine named Bill Elsick, who worked for Exxon.
He was a palynologist that worked for Exxon down in Houston, which at that time, was it Exxon or was it, I don't know, but anyway, Humble.
I think he worked for Humble Oil at that time.
Anyway, he worked in Houston, and I had gotten to know Bill because I was a member of the American Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists and was keeping fairly good track of other palynologists.
I wrote Bill and said, hey, Bill, is there any chance of an opening in the oil industry?
Oil was booming at this time, and they were looking for a lot of people.
to do palynology because palynology is useful in oil exploration.
So I was really asking Bill if he knew of a job.
Turns out that Bill's wife is Bob Skarbonik's first cousin.
And they all go back to snook very frequently.
And one day while eating kolaches at some snook eatery,
Bob happened to mention to Bill, he said, I have just been given a terrible burden.
He said, the dean has asked me to go find an anthropologist, and I don't have the foggiest idea of where to look.
And Bill Elsick said, well, I know of a guy up in Washington State who's in an anthropology department who's looking for a job.
And so Bob Skobanik said, well, give me his name.
Okay.
Well, sure enough, Bob Scribani called me in Washington State and asked me if I would help them find an anthropologist.
Well, of course, I could see between the lines that it was really more of an invitation to apply myself.
I'm a little ahead of the story, though, because I had also written, at the same time I had written Bill Elsick, I had also written my good friend George Carter.
who I had known at the University of Texas, because he had come to Texas when I was a graduate student there,
to give a talk, and he had given a talk on his dissertation, which was really the ethnobotany of the American Southwest.
It's still a classic work.
And he was very much interested, because at the time I was studying pollen, and he was very much convinced that corn had made a transatlantic migration via dispersion, boats of people carrying it,
over to Africa before Columbus.
And so he was convinced that in East Africa, or West Africa actually, that they'd been growing corn prior to Columbus's voyage.
And he had gotten some samples from Nigeria, and he wanted somebody to look at them to see if there was corn pollen.
Well, I volunteered to look for them, and there wasn't any corn pollen in there.
But anyway, that's how I got to know George Carter.
Anyway, I had also written George Carter, who at that time was here at Texas A&M in Geography Department.
Well, George Carter immediately got together with Ed Duran, who was the Department of Geography, and together they sent me a letter inviting me down to Texas A&M to interview for a job as a cartographer, as a mapmaker, to teach mapmaking in geography.
using my training for my undergraduate degree and my experiences as a mapmaker during my graduate work.
So I really came to Texas A&M at their invitation.
They footed the bill for me to be interviewed here to get a job in geography.
But while I was here, since Schubanek had been writing me, I told Bob that I would drop by and say hello.
So I did.
I went by and talked to Bob Skribanek, gave him a copy of my resume, and it sounded very interesting.
And while I was here, and this was in the early days of A&M, I remember that I also got an opportunity to visit with Dean Maxwell.
And then I also saw Jack Williams for 30 minutes.
I thought that was really impressive that the president of the university would have 30 minutes to talk to me.
And of course, when I had talked to Bob Skribanek, I had laid out some
ideas that i had about how they could build an anthropology department and the more i got to talking to him and to dave maxwell and jack williams the more it began to sound like that might be a better way to go than geography the other thing that kind of squirreled my my position in geography was i remember sitting in ed duran's office looking at him and he asked he said if you had to sum up
If you had to sum yourself up in one word, what would you call yourself?
I knew what he wanted.
He wanted me to say, I'm a geographer.
And I said, I'm a palynologist.
That was the wrong answer.
Anyway, they actually did offer me a job in geography, and they offered me a job in anthropology.
And it was really the same pay, so it was really no advantage of one or the other.
But I decided to take my chances with the anthropology one rather than geography because
I saw it as an opportunity.
Now, at the time, Dave Maxwell had told me, he said, well, here's the deal.
He said, we don't know whether anthropology is going to go here on this campus or not.
We'll hire you, and even if it doesn't go, we'll keep you as our token anthropologist.
You know, we're not going to fire you, but if it really takes off, then we will begin to add more money to anthropology, and hopefully someday it will become a, you know, a booming discipline.
In fact, he said, we would love to see it become a separate department within 20 years.
So anyway, that was a calling, and so that's how I got here.
What year did you arrive?
I came here in the summer of 1971, in August.
I started August 1st, 1971, and at the time we had bought a house.